Introduction
This course will teach you the fundamental concepts and techniques of Discrete Mathematics that are useful in Computer Science. This includes using logical reasoning towards problem-solving and proof construction. These concepts and techniques will be an important basis for advanced classes in computer science, particularly Algorithms (Com S 3110) and Theory of Computing (Com S 3310).

Prerequisites
(i) Math 1650, (ii) English 1500, (iii) Com S 2270.

All undergraduates will need to have these three prerequisites before they can take Com S 2300. In addition, they will need to have at least a C- in both Math 1650 and Com S 2270. Graduate students may have some or all of these courses waived at the discretion of the instructor, if they can show proof of having taken the equivalent courses elsewhere.

Topics
Logic, Methods of Formal Proof, Sets, Functions and Relations, Countable and Uncountable Sets, Induction, Recursion, Basics of Counting, Graphs.

Course Info
Class Attendance: Class attendance is mandatory. If you have a valid excuse for why you cannot attend class, let your instructor know in advance. Students who miss class without a valid excuse on days that in-class assignments are given will not be allowed to make up the assignment. Students work in pairs on the in-class assignments and may ask questions to the instructor(s) and TA(s) present. 

 

Lecture Notes: Notes are published (under Modules) in advance for each class. You are encouraged to read the notes in advance so that you can come prepared to ask questions in class. If everyone is prepared, we can go over the notes at a faster pace and spend more time doing problems.

ZyBooks: We will be using ZyBooks as supplementary material. Zybooks has a lot of interactive exercises that will help with your understanding of the material. You are expected to read the Zybooks notes and work on the exercises. You will be graded on your participation. 

 

Required Texts:

Discrete Mathematics and its Applications by Kenneth H. Rosen (7th or 8th edition)

Mathematics for Computer Science by Eric Lehman, F. Thomson Leighton and Albert R. Meyer

ZyBooks

 

Instructors:

Soma Chaudhuri; Office: Atanasoff 226AA   Email: chaudhur@iastate.edu 

Office Hours:  MWF 1:00 - 2:00 pm (and by in-person or Zoom appointment) 

Zoom Room: https://iastate.zoom.us/my/somachaudhuriLinks to an external site.

Kapil Chaulagain; Office: Atanasoff B019  Email: kapil99@iastate.edu

Office Hours: WF 3:30 - 4:30 pm (and by in-person or WebEx appointment) 

WebEx Room: https://iastate.webex.com/meet/kapil99Links to an external site.

 

Teaching Assistants: 

Haniyeh Fekrmandi; Email: haniyehf@iastate.edu            

Office Hours:  W 9:00 - 11:00 am at Pearson 0145

Md Mohaiminul (Mahim) Islam; Email: mmislam@iastate.edu        

Office Hours:  R 9:00 - 11:00 am at Pearson 0145

Satyaki Mukherjee; Email: satyakim@iastate.edu         

Office Hours:  R 3:00 - 5:00 pm at Pearson 0145

Westly Orr; Email: westlyo@iastate.edu    

Office Hours:  F 4:30 - 6:30 pm at Pearson 0145

 

Need help? When you have specific questions for one of us, use our emails given above. When you have general course questions that anyone could answer, email cs230staff@iastate.edu and the first person who sees the email will answer it!

 

Lectures:

Section 1: MWF 11:00 AM - 11:50 AM in Carver 0305 by Soma Chaudhuri

Section 2: MWF 12:05 PM - 12:55 PM in Carver 0305 by Soma Chaudhuri

Section 3: MWF 02:15 PM - 3:05 PM in Carver 0305 by Kapil Chaulagain

Recitations (Discussions):

Section A: T 11:00 AM - 11:50 AM in Physics 0003 by Haniyeh, Satyaki and Mahim

Section B: T 02:15 PM - 3:05 PM in Pearson 1115 by Haniyeh, Satyaki and Mahim

Section C: T 04:25 PM - 5:15 PM in Science 0102 by Haniyeh, Satyaki and Mahim

There are no recitations the first week of classes!

 

 

Course Objectives
We stress Mathematical Reasoning, Combinatorial Analysis and the study of Discrete Computational Structures as needed in your study of computer science. These are expanded on below.

Mathematical Reasoning is the skill to read, comprehend and construct mathematical arguments. We will study mathematical logic, which is a foundation for developing proof methods. An important proof technique, the principle of mathematical induction, will be studied.

Combinatorial Analysis involves different techniques for counting or enumerating objects, an important skill for problem-solving.

Discrete Structures are the abstract mathematical structures used to represent discrete objects and the relationships between these objects. The discrete structures we will be studying include sets, permutations, relations, graphs, and trees. These will be used to model and solve computational problems.

 

Course Learning Outcomes (course outcomes map to ABET outcome 1)
Comprehend and construct statements using mathematical notation.
Read, comprehend and construct logically valid arguments using propositional and predicate logic.
Master proof techniques such as direct proof, proof by contradiction, proof by cases and mathematical induction.
Understand, formalize and prove properties of sets, functions, and relations.
Use the Principle of Mathematical Induction, both as a technique to define discrete computational structures, and as a proof technique to define properties about these structures.
Prove properties about state machines, a mathematical model of computation, using mathematical induction. (1)
Apply counting principles, permutations and combinations to solve problems that have applications in computer science. (1)
Understand, formalize, and prove properties of Graphs and Trees.
Formally define computer science problem statements and use a variety of techniques to solve problems using logical reasoning. (1)
 

ABET Outcome 1: An ability to analyze a complex computing problem, and to apply principles of computing and other relevant disciplines to identify solutions.

Grading Policy
Grading will be based on 10–12 assignments, in-class activities, ZyBooks activities and 2 midterm exams and the final exam.

Homework	15%
In-Class Activities	5%
ZyBooks	5%
2 Midterms	25% (each)
Final	25%
 

Extra Credit will be given for additional problems in homework and exams as well as class participation.

Your final grade will be decided by an absolute grading scale as follows:

 

Score

Grade

at least 90

A

at least 86 but less than 90

A-

at least 82 but less than 86

B+

at least 78 but less than 82

B

at least 74 but less than 78

B-

at least 70 but less than 74

C+

at least 66 but less than 70

C

at least 62 but less than 66

C-

at least 61 but less than 62

D+

at least 60 but less than 61

D

at least 59 but less than 60

D-

less than 59

F

 

Homework Assignments, In-Class Activities and ZyBooks Activities
All homework assignments will be due on Fridays, except on weeks of exams. There will be a total of 10 to 12 homework assignments posted on Canvas. The last homework assignment will be optional and due during prep week. You can find more details on homework assignment schedule in the Schedule of Topics in Modules.

In addition, there will be short, timed in-class activities. These will be done in pairs and administered on Canvas. You are encouraged to seek help from the instructor and TA help to complete these activities. In-class activities will not be announced in advance, and you will need to come to class to take these. You can reference your lecture notes or your textbook for these activities. These are to make sure you understand the basic concepts being covered.

Finally, ZyBooks will give you an additional learning medium. Most topics we will cover in class are covered in ZyBooks, though there are some topics that you will exclusively find in the Class Notes. You should go over the materials in a timely manner and complete the interactive exercises.

 

Assignments are very important to help you understand and master the course material. Please go over (and attempt) the homework problems before you come to recitation so that you are prepared with questions. You are welcome to discuss your homework problems with other students, but you should only discuss and brainstorm ideas at a higher level and work out the details and write up your solutions on your own! If your solutions are found to be identical to that of another student, you will be charged with Academic Dishonesty!

Many of you will want to go online for help on homework problems. While you are encouraged to look at online lectures to get a different perspective on how a topic is covered, you should not access online solutions to problems! If you are having trouble with a homework problem, we encourage you to come and meet with one of us (instructors or TAs) rather than copy from solutions online. You are more likely to really understand how to solve the problem if you solve it with a few hints from us! Furthermore, direct usage of generative artificial intelligence (AI) tools like ChatGPT, Gemini etc. is also treated as academic dishonesty.

If you do happen to use any materials outside class, make sure you reference them in your homework and state what part of the work is your own. We will grade your work accordingly. If you are found to have used materials that you do not reference, you will be charged with Academic Dishonesty. In any case, you should never look up solutions to homework problems! This would be considered academic dishonesty. Please refer to the section on Academic Honesty under the Syllabus Statements link.

The homework must be typeset (preferably in LaTeX). Handwritten solutions will not be accepted. It must be submitted as a PDF file by 11:59 pm on the due date. Late homework will not be accepted.

 

Exams
There will be two exams and the final. Roughly speaking, the breakdown of the topics will be as follows. The first exam will focus on Sets and Logic, Functions and Proof. The second exam will focus on the Principle of Mathematical Induction and Recursion, and Relations. The final will focus on the Cardinality of Sets, Graph Theory and Counting Techniques but will be comprehensive. Since the material is cumulative, you may be tested on topics covered in earlier exams as well. For example, in the final, you may be asked to prove a graph-theoretic concept using induction. 

The midterm exams will be closed book. They will be held in the evening. The exams will be given together for both sections. The first exam has been scheduled for Thursday, October 9, and the second for Thursday, November 13, both at 8:15-9:45 pm. Both midterm exams will be held in 2055 Hoover. The final exam will be scheduled during exam week according to the special exam schedule published by the Registrar. More information on the final exam will be posted once it becomes available. Update: The final exam has been scheduled for Wednesday, December 17 at 7-9 pm.

 

Office Hours
Office hours are provided to answer any questions that you have regarding lecture material, exams or homework. Office hours will be held face to face though additional appointments may be made on Zoom or WebEx. Please take advantage of this opportunity. Every instructor and TA will hold two office hours a week.

Getting Help
You have many options for getting help in this course. First, plan to go to recitations. While they are not required, they can be very helpful. The TAs will go through material covered in lecture and do a lot of problem-solving. In addition, there is Supplemental Instruction, the Help Room and Office Hours! Don't let yourself get behind on the material!

 

Academic Honesty
In this course, you are encouraged to discuss assignments with other students since this helps in understanding. This does not mean that you work together from start to finish on every problem! You should always think about the problem first on your own, and then discuss your approach with others when you are stuck. Finally, the solutions you turn in must be written individually, based on your own understanding. Write down the names of others students you have collaborated with. If you have used materials outside class, reference these as well (these cannot be actual solutions!).  Anyone submitting solutions that are too similar to that of other students or online sources will be suspected of academic dishonesty. Similarly, anyone who is found to have uploaded their solutions or published course solutions to open websites for general viewing will be suspected of academic dishonesty. In the best case, you may receive no credit for the relevant assignment, and in the worst case, a failing grade in the class. 

Any copying detected during exams will be dealt with very harshly. A student found to copy will be given a failing grade right away!

The class will follow Iowa State University's policy on academic dishonesty (5.1 in the Student Code of Conduct). Students are responsible for adhering to university policy and the expectations in the course syllabus and on coursework and exams and for following directions given by faculty, instructors, and ISU Test Center regulations related to coursework, assessments, and exams. Anyone suspected of academic misconduct will be reported to the Office of Student Conduct in the Dean of Students Office. Information about academic integrity and the value of completing academic work honestly can be found in the Iowa State University Academic Integrity TutorialLinks to an external site..

 

Top Hat
We may use Top Hat in this course. Top Hat is available to Iowa State University students at no additional cost. If we do use Top Hat in this course, we will announce it and provide further instructions.  Top Hat will be accessible through Canvas.  Students must click the Top Hat link in Canvas the first time they access the Top Hat course. Failure to do so will cause the student to be dropped from the Top Hat course each night and their grades and attendance will not sync back to Canvas. Once a student establishes the connection by clicking the link, all previous scores will come back and be synced to Canvas.

 

Disclaimer: In extenuating circumstances, the schedule, policies, or procedures are subject to change. All efforts will be made not to alter assignment due dates or scheduled exams. Any modifications will be communicated in writing, verbally in class, and/or published in the Canvas course.

 

COMS 2300 follows the ISU policy on the following topics.

Free Expression
Accessibility Statement
Discrimination and Harassment
Mental Health and Well-Being Resources
Statement on Prep Week
Religious Accommodation
 

Free Expression
Iowa State University supports and upholds the First Amendment protection of freedom of speech and the principle of academic freedomLinks to an external site. in order to foster a learning environment where open inquiry and the vigorous debate of a diversity of ideas are encouraged. Students will not be penalized for the content or viewpoints of their speech as long as student expression in a class context is germane to the subject matter of the class and conveyed in an appropriate manner.

No employee, student, applicant, or campus visitor is compelled to disclose their pronouns. Anyone may voluntarily disclose their own pronouns.

Accessibility Statement
Iowa State University is committed to supporting students with disabilities. Promoting these values entails providing reasonable accommodations where barriers exist to students’ full participation in higher education. Students in need of accommodations or who experience accessibility-related barriers to learning should work with Student Accessibility Services (SAS) to identify resources and support available to them. Staff at SAS collaborate with students and campus partners to coordinate accommodations and to further the academic excellence of students with disabilities. Information about SAS is available online at www.sas.dso.iastate.edu, by email at accessibility@iastate.edu, or by phone at 515-294-7220.

Non-Discrimination Statement
Iowa State University does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, age, ethnicity, religion, national origin, pregnancy, sexual orientation, genetic information, sex, marital status, disability, or status as a U.S. Veteran. Inquiries regarding non-discrimination policies may be directed to Office of Equal Opportunity, 2680 Beardshear Hall, 515 Morrill Road, Ames, Iowa 50011, Tel. 515-294-7612, email eooffice@iastate.edu.

Mental Health and Wellbeing Resources
We’re committed to your success and wellbeing at Iowa State. As a Cyclone, you can access 24/7 resources, services, and people dedicated to helping you achieve your goals and be your best in and out of the classroom. Whether you need academic support or just someone to talk to, we’re here for you at Cyclone Support (cyclonesupport.iastate.edu). If you are struggling emotionally and need support, there’s confidential help available 24/7/365. You can call or text 988 or use the chat at 988lifeline.orgLinks to an external site..

Statement on Prep Week
This class follows the Iowa State University Prep Week policy, as noted in the ISU Policy Library and the Senior Vice President and Provost’s website.

Religious Accommodation
Iowa State University welcomes a broad spectrum of religious beliefs and practices, recognizing the contributions differing experiences and viewpoints can bring to the community. There may be times when an academic requirement conflicts with religious observances and practices. If that happens, students may request the reasonable accommodation for religious practices. In all cases, you must put your request in writing. The instructor will review the situation in an effort to provide a reasonable accommodation, when possible, to do so without fundamentally altering a course. For students, you should first discuss the conflict and your requested accommodation with your professor at the earliest possible time. You or your instructor may also seek assistance from the Dean of Students Office at 515-294-1020 or the Office of Equal Opportunity at 515-294-7612.